Pushkin.
Hello. Hello. Malcolm here. Before we
get to the episode, I want to let you
know you can get this entire season now
adree by subscribing to Revisionist
History on Pushkin Plus. Sign up on the
show page on Apple Podcasts or at
pushkin.fm/plus.
Pushkin Plus subscribers can access ad
free episodes, full audio books,
exclusive binges, and bonus content for
all Pushkin shows. A little while ago, a
friend of mine told me, "You have to
meet this person I know, Kate
Porterfield. She's got the strangest job
in America." So, I did. We got together,
Porterfield and I, in a little
conference room in Manhattan. I just
want to understand how you ended up
where you are.
>> So you're kind of viewing as we're just
talking you're you're thinking about
whether there's something here that will
that'll evolve over time that you would
imagine being putting in the podcast. Is
that is that kind of what you're
thinking?
>> Yeah.
>> Porterfield is a psychologist. We talked
for a few hours then again and again.
One conversation leading to another
until she began to talk about a case
that had affected her deeply. Although
she doesn't use the word case, she says
person, a man on death row. When I first
went to see Kenny, so now it had been 2
months since the execution attempt. He
wanted to talk for the first probably 2
hours of our visit about how beautiful
his goodbyes were and the love he
received from his family as he was going
into the execution. That's what he
wanted to start with. And I found this
so powerful and and also fascinating
honestly as a clinician because what I
first thought was oh he's avoiding right
he can't talk about the execution. He
talked to me about love for for probably
two two and a half hours to the point
where I had to say, you know, this is
incredible and I'm so happy you're
sharing it and I'm not surprised.
I also though I want to know what
happened.
[Music]
What happened was a botched execution,
punishment for a crime that took place
over 30 years before. A river of blood
that had already claimed the lives of
three others.
Kate Porterfield told me her version of
events. Then I went out and got other
people's versions of what happened. And
that's where the story I'm about to tell
you comes from.
I want to figure out why this case went
on for as long as it did. Why it took so
many bizarre and unsettling turns along
the way?
And the other question, maybe the more
important question, is why have we
created a system that in trying to
respond to suffering all too often makes
suffering worse? He made me really pause
and think a lot. Watching someone only
start from a place of love after
something so horrible was I had never
seen that before.
Welcome to Revisionist History, my
podcast about things overlooked and
misunderstood.
This is a special 7 episode series, The
Alabama Murders.
Episode 1, The True Church.
>> So, we're now in Are we in Florence
here?
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. This story takes place in
northwestern Alabama in an area called
the Scholes. The so-called Alabama Black
Belt, the broad flat swath of fertile
farmland where the old antibbellum
cotton plantations were established, is
several hours drive to the south. This
is rolling hills, Appalachia, not the
Mississippi Delta. Four towns on either
side of the Tennessee River. Sheffield,
Tuscumbia, Muscles, and Florence.
Sheffield is workingass struggling.
Muscle Scholes is a spiritual home of
rhythm and blues. Tuscumbia is famous
for being the birthplace of Helen
Keller. Florence is the largest. A
graceful town of beautiful pre-war
buildings with a Frank Lloyd Wright
house downtown.
>> You know, there's no interstate that
runs through Florence. There's no major
airport. So, it's a little bit of a
closed society almost. It's really neat.
>> I started going to Alabama after talking
to Cape Porterfield. And on one of my
first trips, I met a man named Grant
Azbull, a preacher, early 40s, big
beard, baseball cap, though not on
Sunday morning, of course. He was my
guide to Florence.
>> You know, there's good music, there's
good art, there's good food, but you
just don't happen here. You have to want
to to come to Florence.
This is the place where it all started
with a personal transgression, a matter
of the heart by another preacher, a man
named Charles Senate.
I was only 7 years old when it happened,
but I remember it being really
disconcerting because if you're in this
group and like in our in this area in
particular, I mean, you've been to
Florence. Florence, you don't get here
by accident. And so the idea that
someone within this framework
could do something like Charles Sinnate
did was very disruptive. It was talked
about kind of in hush tones. I was
talking to our local, he goes to church
with us here. is actually the the
historian for the city of Florence and
and he was telling me that one of the
preachers in one of the churches in town
while that was going on got up in the
pull pit and said Charles Senate is a
faithful Christian brother. The things
that are being said about him are lies
with the idea right he is a faithful
Church of Christ member and almost
incapable of this kind of thing.
[Music]
in Alabama. The Scholes is the spiritual
center of the Protestant denomination
known as the Church of Christ. There are
many, many Church of Christ
congregations within an hour's drive of
Florence. And I don't think that any of
the things we're going to explore over
the course of this series will make
sense unless you first understand
something about this denomination.
If I blindfolded you and put you in a
early 1980s Church of Christ
congregation, how long would it take you
before you knew you were in Church of
Christ?
>> Uh, I would know in about 3 minutes or
less.
This is Lee Camp who has taught theology
for years at Lipkcom University in
Nashville, one of the most prestigious
of the many universities around the
United States affiliated with the Church
of Christ.
>> What would what would be the tip off?
>> Well, the singing would be a capella is
the first thing. And so, you know, the
only place you're going to find a
capella singing is probably either going
to be Menites or Church of Christ. Maybe
Church of the Brethren.
And then there are going to be certain
phrases or that are going to get said
that would just be a tip off that you
know this is where they go
>> in the prayers are going to say Lord
guard guide and direct us. I don't know
there would just be language like that
that I would immediately know.
>> By the way for those of you who know
something about country music what do
Wayan Jennings Roy Orbison Loretta Lynn
Glenn Campbell Dwight Yokum Pat Boon
Crystal Gale I could go on all have in
common? They all came out of the ac
cappella tradition of the Church of
Christ. It's not Sunday morning. I just
take you to a church. It's empty. How
long does it take you to know that
you're in a Church of Christ? There's no
one in there.
>> Um
you you look around. What do you see
that's a tip off? No.
>> There's no organ. And just the whole
architecture is very very simple. Um
there's lack of pretense. There's
certainly no
uh art on the walls. There's no stations
of the cross. There's uh there's pews
and there are there's on the one side at
the front is going to be a board that
shows attendance contribution numbers.
On the other side's going to be a board
that has the hymn numbers that you slide
in with the numbers. And in the middle
is going to be a simple pull pit.
I know about the Church of Christ
because my best friend is the
screenwriter Charles Randolph whose
father Dale was a Church of Christ
minister who went to Lipkcom. And once
when I was visiting Lipkcom, the same
school where Lee Camp teaches, a little
old lady came up to me and said, "Are
you Dale Randolph's famous son Chuck's
friend?" Yes, I am. And while I'm
playing this game, I should point out
that halfway through my conversation
with Grant Asbel, I discovered that he
did his doctorate at Lipkcom with Lee
Camp. The point is that the Church of
Christ is a very small world. It's a
family.
Now, you're from Alabama.
>> I am from Alabama.
>> You were born in
>> Tallaladega.
>> Talladega. And
>> not Tallaladega or Tallaladeigga. It's
Taliga.
>> Talladeigga.
And you grew up in the church of Christ?
>> I did.
>> When you say that you are uh that you
belong to the church of Christ, what are
you saying about what does that mean?
How's that different from I'm a Baptist?
>> Well, it depends on who you're talking
to and where they are in their
experience of Churches of Christ. But
when someone says, "I'm a member of the
Church of Christ,"
that means that they are members of the
true church that restored New Testament
Christianity and everybody else is wrong
and that this is the true church.
Um, that's not a denomination that's not
Protestant, it's not Catholic, it's just
the true church.
In the taxonomy of southern
Protestantism, there are the
Pentecostals, the singing, the swaying,
speaking in tongues, emotion. The Church
of Christ isn't that. Then there are the
fundamentalists, the Southern Baptists,
fire and brimstone. The Church of Christ
isn't that either. The Baptists and the
Pentecostals can sometimes go on all
Sunday afternoon. In a Church of Christ,
you're out in an hour.
These are the people of the book. There
is said to be more advanced degrees in
the Church of Christ leadership than any
of the southern denominations. They're a
church of rules and certainties,
simplicity, and clarity. A church
inspired by the idea that anyone who
studies the Bible, reads it closely and
thoughtfully, can discern the path to
salvation. That's the good part, the
beautiful part. But the other part, and
by the way, no one is more willing to
acknowledge the limitations of the
church of Christ than people who belong
to the church of Christ, is that the
rules, the certainty, the intimacy can
become a straight jacket.
Like I love and hate Church of Christ.
You know, I'm I love them and I have
hated them.
Um,
and I, you know, I love them because,
um,
I've spent my life doing what I've done
with my life because of what I learned
in my church. You know, I was loved by
my church. I was loved by the people in
that church.
Um
and yet at the same time that that the
the traditions in the latter part of the
20th century have done a lot of damage
to a lot of people including me. There's
a sense of uh fear
and there's there's always the danger
that you'll be um
kind of cut off. And so it was kind of
fear of just saying you're not okay. You
know, you don't tow the line. And so the
church the church would practice this
sort of on occasion would practice this
sort of dysfellowshipping we called it
where you could literally be socially
you know estranged, socially disciplined
publicly.
Um and then apart from some sort of
public statement of repentance, you
couldn't be a member of good standing in
the church.
You cannot divorce your wife unless
there is a documented case of adultery.
Full stop. Women cannot participate in a
church service. Full stop. Singing must
be ac cappella. Instruments are a
frivolity. You've got, you know, all
these taboos around no dancing because
if you dance, you're going to lust and
if you lust, you're going to go to hell.
you know, no mixed bathing we called it,
which means you're not swimming around
people of the opposite sex because if
you do, you're going to lust and you'll
go to hell.
um one and one of the my favorite
stories about kind of illustrating this
was that um we were on a youth group
trip and um in another town and we were
pulling out of the church to go to lunch
break and
the preacher driving the van van full of
you know impressionable 14 15 year olds.
He looks to the left and there's this
guy jogging down the sidewalk in his
jogging shorts. And we were not
permitted to wear shorts in public
because of the lust thing, you know. And
this guy's jogging down the sidewalk and
the preacher looks at him and he says,
"He looks real nice in those jogging
shorts. He'll look real nice in hell."
This is the world Charles Senate, the
man at the center of our story belong
to. He was born in West Virginia. His
father was a Church of Christ preacher.
He got married to Elizabeth Dorene in
1962. She was the picture of a
preacher's wife. They had two sons
together. And by the time she was in her
early 40s, Elizabeth was already a
grandmother.
There are still lots of people in the
Scholes who remember the sentence.
>> She was a typical love my grandbaby, let
me run home, make chocolate chip
cookies, and keep them over weekend with
their family, their parents going to go
out and have a date night.
This is Susan Mosley, a nurse at a local
weight loss clinic who became close with
Elizabeth.
>> You know, brought them babies with her a
lot of times and they and I made a
little thing in there in that little
exercise room, little table chair. We're
calling books so they can sit there and
color them while she was living.
>> Charles got a doctorate in divinity in
the 1970s, became the preacher at a
Church of Christ in Jasper, Alabama, a
small town 2 hours south of the Scholes.
He was good. In a few years, he tripled
the size of the church. He was handsome,
dynamic, a wonderful singing voice in
the best Church of Christ tradition.
At some point in his 30s, at the point
his career seemed ascendant, things
began to go sideways for Charles Senate.
There were rumors of some indiscretion
at the Church of Christ in Jasper, an
affair. The elders fired him. If you
want to trace the precise moment at
which things began to unravel, perhaps
it was here because there is a version
of events in which he could have stayed
in Jasper for his whole career built
upon his success there. To be a minister
at a successful church of Christ is a
position of real status. There's a kind
of free market in that world. When
there's a hot young preacher in town,
people will leave their churches and
join the rising star. Senate was that
rising star. But then he lost it all. He
was despondent. His family came upon him
one night, curled up in a ball on the
couch. He'd had a nervous breakdown. He
became suicidal. He ended up spending
weeks in a psychiatric hospital in
Birmingham.
This is the summary from the medical
records of the psychiatric facility
where he was hospitalized.
Exam reveals an unckempt, hostile,
rebellious white male. His thought
content is preoccupied. His psycho motor
agitated and his affect labile. His mood
is depressed, his sensorium confused,
and his tension level tense. His insight
is lacking and his judgment is poor.
He found another job, then another.
Moved to the Scholes and became the
preacher at the Westside Church of
Christ in Sheffield. Small working-class
congregation, little white church, not
Jasper, a step down. starting over.
>> A lot of this that I know was hearsay
amongst us all.
>> Yeah.
>> You know how it passes from person to
person. Gets bigger or gets smaller. So
>> yeah,
>> take everything I tell you with a grain
of salt cuz it was all here today.
>> This is Charlie Bill and her son Eric.
They were members of Charles Senna's
church. And was he was he a good
preacher?
>> Evidently, he must have been uh
>> charismatic. Yes, I would say so.
>> Very charismatic.
>> Yeah. Yeah. The
>> At the point my mother called him a
ladies man.
>> Oh, really? Oh, your mother had a she
had a uh Did she mean that?
>> Had a way of labeling people.
>> Did she Did she mean that in a positive
way or in a negative way?
>> If my grandmother said it, it was
negative.
>> Yeah. She was very conservative and very
uh
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. She that would have been a very a
very negative thing to say about
somebody.
>> Maybe I could say it's about as pure
Church of Christ as you can get.
>> There were whispers about a woman in the
Westside congregation. Doris,
>> we heard the, you know,
connected rumors that she was involved.
Um her husband was having some serious
issues. I I don't know. I I
reading on it, I almost would think she
was seeking uh I think it he was
probably her minister cuz I think she
went to uh Westside, wasn't it?
>> Yeah, I think so. At the time,
>> that's my understanding. I don't know.
Therefore,
>> I would almost say she was probably
seeking some counseling from him.
>> Charles Sennet was in love with a woman
who was not his wife. He had a book of
poems in his office called Memories of
the Heart with Doris's picture in it.
There were rumors someone saw a
Valentine, Charles a given Doris. I
talked with another former member of the
Westside Church, Carl Rhoden. We sat in
his living room. He had a dog on his
lap.
>> I'm just curious. Was Was he a good
>> He was a nice fellow year. Won't be
around.
>> He was what?
>> Nice.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, you just couldn't hardly beat
him.
>> Somebody be sick, he'd be the first one
there with some food.
nursing home. He'd be the first one
there with something to eat or you know.
>> Was he a good preacher?
>> Yeah.
That's what say he had a split
personality. Best I can tell.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you remember uh he had been it came
out during the trial that he had been uh
he had been at a church in Jasper and
had been fired from that job cuz he was
same thing having an affair with someone
in the church. Well, see, they should
have told us when they fired him, but
then nobody said nothing about it to
him.
>> Yeah, it
>> was all over. You might as well say.
>> Yeah. There's no way of There was He
just Do you remember anything about how
he came to the church in the first
place?
>> You don't?
>> I was just a member there and I don't
>> Yeah,
>> I don't know.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't know how they got a hold of him
or anything.
>> Mhm. So, he was really popular.
>> Yeah.
>> He was a nice fellow.
Like I say, he'd be the first one at
somebody's house with food, you know, or
he was just a nice guy. That's all you
make out of him.
>> Nobody would ever thought this that
what, you know, he would have done
something like that.
>> In the winter of 1988, Charles and his
wife Elizabeth fought. She wanted a
divorce, and they both knew what that
meant. He shouted at her, "I won't lose
another church."
He was $150,000 in debt from failed
business ventures. This on a preacher's
salary. His behavior grew erratic. The
walls began to close in. He had a secret
he could not share. A marriage that was
disintegrating. Demons he was
desperately trying to keep at bay. He
still goes to preach every Sunday. But
no one knows the full story of his life.
No one. That is except the only person
who would have mattered for Charles
Senate and that was God.
One thing I don't understand is he seems
completely ills suited
for the ministry. He seems volatile.
He's having an affair with a congregant.
His finances are a mess. He's abusive to
his wife. He's I'm just curious, how
does he how would someone like that
enter and survive in the ministry,
particularly in a world where people are
as conscious of conduct as the Church of
Christ community is.
>> He worked very hard to make sure nobody
knew outside that tight circle of
biological family. I asked a Church of
Christ minister named Rodney Plunkett
about the case. He knew Charles Senate.
>> That that's not atypical. That Yeah, he
they they mask
>> and the amount of effort that must have
gone into masking that
>> enormous Malcolm. It's absolutely
enormous.
>> I asked my theologian friend Lee Camp
the same question. One of the things I'm
trying to understand
is we have this man, Church of Christ
minister Charles Sennet, um, in little
town northwestern Alabama, uh, who is
having an affair and his wife has
decided to divorce him. And you know I
I'm wondering were he a you know
a Menanite or were he a Muslim or
whatever all those all those traditions
would have would shape his
>> right
>> his dysfunction in some way and I'm
curious how does his how does his
tradition shape his dysfunction that's
what I'm trying to get at what's going
on inside his head as he processes the
kind of
his affair his wife's decision
and his and the chaos of his own life.
And he's he's the pastor of this this
little white clapper church in a corner
of Sheffield.
>> Yeah. I mean, who knows, right? But, you
know, I would make up that
the sense of shame is overwhelming.
And when you're in a context of
overwhelming shame,
um it can do terrifying things to the
psyche.
>> Mhm. And in the absence of any sort of
um
constructive grace, and I don't I don't
mean by that some flabby sense of oh
everything's okay, you know, grace, but
some sort of constructive sense of
grace, you know, it it can quickly lead
you to all sorts of madness.
Christian grace. God's unmmerited favor
and loving kindness. A gift freely given
to humanity unearned and undeserved. A
spontaneous act of generosity on God's
part extended to all humanity regardless
of their sin. What Camp was saying and
what many others in the church of Christ
came to believe was that their church
particularly their church in that era 40
50 years ago did not understand grace.
Grant Asel told me about his uncle, the
song leader in a Church of Christ
congregation who once talked a little
bit too much about grace and forgiveness
at Sunday school and so was let go. The
church elders wouldn't even let him
finish out his contract. Because if you
had deciphered the rules of the Bible,
the logic of the Christian text, then
there shouldn't be any deviation, should
there? It was all crystal clear. And if
you started to grant forgiveness for
those who strayed from that narrow path,
then what incentive did people have to
follow the narrow path? That was the
thinking. And it's where the shame that
Lee Camp was talking about came from.
Because in the absence of grace, there
is no relief from transgression. People
like Asbel and Lee Camp have been trying
to push their church in a more forgiving
direction to bring grace into their
religious experience. But in the 1980s
in a small town in Alabama, this is what
Asbull said. And
>> the idea behind that is this idea that
if you want to one day be judged
faithful,
you have to have kept these rules and
even to the point where if you break one
of the rules, you can ask forgiveness.
But the way that it felt as a kid was if
you fell out of an airplane and you said
a cuss word on the way down and you
didn't have a chance to repent of that
word before you hit the ground,
uh then you might your soul might be
lost to damnation for eternity.
>> When Lee Camp said, "I have loved my
church and I have hated my church," this
was the part he hated.
I mean, I think it's interesting that
you said, you know, when we think when
we imagine what is going through the
mind of someone whose
marriage is in trouble, who is in love
with another woman,
one possible interpretation is that
their motivation is genuine in the sense
that they have fallen out of love with
their wife and in love with someone else
and see the possibility for a greater
happiness and are willing to endure
a certain amount of pain and heartbreak
to get to that greater happiness. But
that's not
I'm not imagining that's what it is.
It's he is in love with another woman
and is consumed
with shame over his predicament.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I mean there's certainly so
far as his church context would be
concerned, there's no viable route to a
greater happiness with the other woman
because it's simply not going to be
permitted unless you leave the community
that you probably think is the community
that you have to be a part of if you're
not going to go to hell.
I mean, it's that simple really. Again,
I I don't want to speculate about what
he's thinking, but
I would conjecture given all that we
know, you know, that I know about that
experience, there's it would be
plausible that something like that's
going on.
>> Mhm.
>> You know,
>> which is a
which is a he's in a terrifying for him
a terrifying place.
>> Sure.
As I'm sure was his wife.
[Music]
There was this joke
uh that said that
it was easier to get forgiveness in the
church of Christ for murdering somebody
than it was to be divorced.
There is a proverb that dates back to
the Middle Ages that I'm sure you've
heard in one version or another. For
want of a nail, the shoe was lost. For
want of a shoe, the horse was lost. For
want of a horse, the rider was lost. For
want of a rider, the message was lost.
For want of a message, the battle was
lost. For want of a battle, the kingdom
was lost. All for the want of a nail.
The proverb of a lost nail is what's
called a failure cascade. One small
misstep or mishap leads to a second
bigger problem and a third even bigger
problem. And finally, at the end of the
chain, catastrophe.
[Music]
The northeastern blackout in August of
2003, one of the biggest blackouts in
history, was a failure cascade. A couple
of trees on the East Lake transmission
line outside of Cleveland, grew a little
bit too tall, and the electrical line at
that precise moment, perhaps because of
the summer heat, sagged a little bit
more than usual and touched the trees.
The contact caused a short. The short
caused the power that used to run along
that line to be rerouted along another
line, which overloaded that line,
causing an even bigger electrical surge
to be rerouted to another line and on
and on, leading to a series of failures
that rippled across the entire
northeastern grid, leaving 50 million
people without electricity.
For want of a chainsaw, the power was
lost.
[Music]
The Alabama Murders is about a classic
failure cascade only where the ever
widening ripples were caused not by
mechanical or institutional defects but
failures of character, of justice, of
compassion.
[Music]
coming up on the Alabama murders
>> that the viciousness was there that he
could do something like that. I don't
know. I answered the call and I got all
the information on who done it, who was
all involved, and all the particulars.
>> He was having an affair with a
parishioner.
There weren't 70 people that went to
that church. How did they not know that
this was going on?
>> I don't know which one of them killed
her. I really don't. But I think both of
them got what they probably deserved
legally and morally.
>> And at the time we hadn't had an
execution in Alabama in a very long
time. And I said, "Sure." Well, you
know, I didn't know what I was getting
into.
>> What is taught either in nursing school
or as an EMT or as a doctor cannot be
lifted into the death chamber. Like it's
not the same place.
He would say to himself, "Turn to the
right to the victim's family and
apologize. Turn to the left, tell my
family I love them." So, he would have
this little practice. To the right, I'm
sorry. To the left, I love you.
[Music]
Revisionist History is produced by Lucy
Sullivan, Bendadaf Hafrey, and Nina Bird
Lawrence. Additional reporting by
Bendalf Haffrey and Lee Hedgepath. Our
editor is Karen Shukerji. Factchecking
by Kate Furby. Our executive producers
Jacob Smith. Production support from
Luke Lamond. Engineering by Nina Bird
Lawrence. Original scoring by Luis Gara
with Paul Brainard and Jimmy Ba. Sound
design and additional music by Jake
Gorski.
I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
[Music]
[Laughter]